Add documentation - Develop on Kuzzle - API Controllers (#1838)
kuzzleio/kuzzle: doc/2/guides/develop-on-kuzzle/2-api-controllers/index.md

# API Controllers

> Kuzzle allows to extend its existing API using controllers. Controllers are logical containers containing several actions.  

Author: Actual new file

# API Controllers

Kuzzle allows to extend its existing API using Controllers. Controllers are **logical containers containing several actions**.  

These actions are then **processed like any other API action** and can be executed by the users through the different mechanisms to secure and normalize requests.

## Add a new Controller

Each controller therefore has several actions. Each of these **actions is associated with a function** called [handler](/core/2/guides/develop-on-kuzzle/2-api-controllers#action-handler).

::: info
The syntax of the definition of these actions and the associated handlers is defined by the [ControllerDefinition](/core/2/some-link) interface.  
:::

By convention, a controller action is identified with the name of the controller followed by the action separated by a colon: `<controller>:<action>` (e.g. [document:create](/core/2/api/controllers/document/create)).

::: warning
Controllers must be added to the application before the application is started with the [Backend.start](/core/2/some-link) method.
:::

We have chosen to allow users to add controllers in two different ways in order to best adapt to their needs.  

> These two ways are very similar and expose the same functionalities.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two ways are very similar and achieve the same goal.  
```

:::

```js
import { Controller } from 'kuzzle'

class GreetingController extends Controller {
  constructor (app: Backend) {
    super(app);

    // type ControllerDefinition
    this.definition = {
      actions: {
        sayHello: {
          handler: this.sayHello
        },
        sayGoodbye: {
          handler: this.sayGoodbye
        }
      }
    }
  }

  async sayHello (request: Request) { /* ... */ }

  async sayGoodbye (request: Request) { /* ... */ }
}
```

Once you have defined your controller class, you can instantiate it and pass it to the `Backend.controller.use` method:

```js
const greetingController = new GreetingController(app)

app.controller.use(greetingController)
```

This way of doing things takes longer to develop but it allows you to have a better code architecture while respecting OOP concepts.

## Handler Function

The handler is the function that will **be called each time our API action is executed**.

This function **takes a [Request object](/core/2/some-link)** as a parameter and **must return a Promise** resolving on the result to be returned to the client.

> This function is defined in the `handler` property of an action. Its signature is as follows: `(request: Request) => Promise<any>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function is defined in the `handler` property of an action. Its signature is: `(request: Request) => Promise<any>`.
```

Indeed, **the HTTP protocol uses verbs and routes** in order to address an action whereas the other protocols only use the controller and action name in their JSON payloads.

### Define a HTTP route

When defining a controller action, it is also possible to **specify one or more HTTP routes** available to execute our action using the `http` property.

This property is at the same level as `handler` and **represents an array of routes**.  
Each route is an object containing a `verb` and a `path` property.

The following HTTP verbs are available: `get`, `post`, `put`, `delete`, `head`.

::: info
When the `path` property starts with a `/` then the route is added as is, otherwise the route will be prefixed with `/_/`.
:::

```js
app.controller.register('greeting', {
  actions: {
    sayHello: {
      handler: async (request: Request) => {
        return `Hello, ${request.input.args.name}`
      },
      http: [
        // generated route: "GET http://<host>:<port>/greeting/hello"
        { verb: 'get', path: '/greeting/hello' },
        // generated route: "POST http://<host>:<port>/_/hello/world"
        { verb: 'post', path: 'hello/world' },
      ]
    }
  }
})
```

::: warning

> It is recommended to let Kuzzle prefix the routes with `/_/` in order not avoid conflict with the existing routes of the standard API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to let Kuzzle prefix the routes with `/_/` in order to avoid conflict with the existing routes of the standard API.
```

:::

It is possible to define paths with url parameters. These parameters will be captured and then integrated into the [Request Input](/core/2/guides/develop-on-kuzzle/2-api-controllers#request-input).

```js
app.controller.register('greeting', {
  actions: {
    sayHello: {
      handler: async (request: Request) => {
        // "name" comes from the url parameter
        return `Hello, ${request.input.args.name}`
      },
      http: [
        { verb: 'get', path: '/email/send/:name' },
      ]
    }
  }
})
```

### Default route

If the `http` property is not set, then Kuzzle will **generate a default route** so that the action can be called from the HTTP protocol.

This default generated route has the following format: `GET http://<host>:<port>/_/<controller-name>/<action-name>`.

The name of the controller and the action will be converted to `kebab-case` format.  
For example the default route of the `sayHello` action will be: `GET http://<host>:<port>/_/greeting/say-hello`.

::: info
It is possible to prevent the generation of a default HTTP route by providing an empty array to the `http` property.  

> By doing this, **the action can never be executed from the HTTP protocol**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By doing this, **the action will not be available through the HTTP protocol**.
```

:::

## Request Input

The `handler` of an API action receives an instance of [Request object](/core/2/some-link). This object represents an API request and **contains both the client input and client contextual information**.

The arguments of requests sent to the Kuzzle API are available in the [Request.input](/core/2/some-link) property.

The main available properties are the following:
 - `controller`: API controller name
 - `action`: API action name
 - `resource`: Kuzzle specifics arguments (`_id`, `index` and `collection`)

>  - `args`: arguments

Reviewer 2: (nitpicking)

```suggestion
 - `args`: additional arguments
```

 - `body`: body content

### HTTP

With HTTP, there are 3 types of input parameters:
 - URL parameters (__e.g. `/greeting/hello/:name`__)
 - Query arguments (__e.g. `/greeting/hello?name=aschen`__)
 - Request body

URL parameters and query arguments can be found in the `request.input.args` property **unless it is a Kuzzle specific argument** (`_id`, `index` and `collection`), in that case they can be found in the `request.input.resource` property.

The content of the query body can be found in the `request.input.body` property 

::: info

> The request body must be in JSON format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The request body must either be in JSON format or submitted as an HTTP form (URL encoded or multipart form data)
```

        assert(request.input.args.age === '27')
        assert(request.input.body.city === 'Antalya')
      },
      http: [
        { verb: 'POST', path: 'greeting/hello/:name' }
      ]
    }
  }
})
```

::: info
See the [Request Payload](/core/2/api/essentials/query-syntax#http) page for more information about using the API with HTTP.
::: 

### Other protocols

Other protocols directly **use JSON payloads**.  

These payloads contain all the information directly:

```bash
$ npx wscat -c ws://localhost:7512 --execute '{
  "controller": "greeting",
  "action": "sayHello",
  "_id": "JkkZN62jLSA",
  "age": 27,
  "name": "aschen",
  "body": {
    "city": "Antalya"
  }
}'
```

We can retrieve them in the [Request object](/core/2/some-link) passed to the `handler`:

```js
import assert from 'assert'

app.controller.register('greeting', {
  actions: {
    sayHello: {
      handler: async (request: Request) => {
        assert(request.input.resource._id === 'JkkZN62jLSA')
        assert(request.input.args.name === 'aschen')
        assert(request.input.args.age === '27')
        assert(request.input.body.city === 'Antalya')
      },
    }
  }
})
```

::: warning

> `_id`, `index` and `collection` are **specific Kuzzle inputs** and the are available in the `request.input.resource` property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`_id`, `index` and `collection` are **specific Kuzzle inputs** and are available in the `request.input.resource` property.
```

> `_id`, `index` and `collection` are **specific Kuzzle inputs** and the will end up in the `request.input.resource` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`_id`, `index` and `collection` are **specific Kuzzle inputs** and the are available in the `request.input.resource` property.
```

| `status`     | Response status, using [HTTP status codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_HTTP_status_codes) |
| `volatile`   | Arbitrary data repeated from the initial request                                                    |
The `result` property will contain the return of the action `handler` function.

For example, when calling this controller action:
```js
app.controller.register('greeting', {
  actions: {
    sayHello: {
      handler: async (request: Request) => {
        return `Hello, ${request.input.args.name}`
      }
    }
  }
})
```

The following response will be sent:

```bash
$ npx wscat -c ws://localhost:7512 --execute '{
  "controller": "greeting",
  "action": "sayHello",
  "name": "Yagmur"
}'

{
  "requestId": "a6f4f5b6-1aa2-4cf9-9724-12b12575c047",
  "status": 200,
  "error": null,
  "controller": "greeting",
  "action": "sayHello",
  "collection": null,
  "index": null,
  "volatile": null,
  "result": "Hello, Yagmur", # <= handler function return value
  "room": "a6f4f5b6-1aa2-4cf9-9724-12b12575c047"
}
```

#### Return a custom response

In some cases it may be necessary to **return a response that differs** from the standard API response format.

> This may be to send a **smaller JSON response** for constrained environments, to **perform HTTP redirection** or to **return another mime** type such as CSV, an image, a PDF document, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This may be to send a **smaller JSON response** for constrained environments, to **perform HTTP redirection** or to **return another MIME type** such as CSV, an image, a PDF document, etc.
```

> For this it is possible to use the method [Request.setResult](/core/2/some-lin):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this it is possible to use the method [Request.setResult](/core/2/some-lin) with the `raw` option set to true. This option prevents Kuzzle from standardizing an action's output:
```

      }
    }
  }
})
```

The response will only contain the CSV document:

```bash
$ curl localhost:7512/_/files/csv

name,age
aschen,27
cener,28
```

## Use a custom Controller Action

As we have seen, controller actions can be executed via different protocols.

We will explore the various possibilities available to execute API actions.

```js
app.controller.register('greeting', {
  actions: {
    sayHello: {
      handler: async (request: Request) => {
        return `Hello, ${request.input.args.name}`
      }
    }
  }
})
```

### HTTP

To execute our action through HTTP protocol CURL can be used:

```bash
$ curl http://localhost:7512/_/greeting/say-hello?name=Yagmur
```

::: info
Default generated route uses `GET` verb.  
It is therefore possible to open it directly in a browser: [http://localhost:7512/_/greeting/say-hello?name=Yagmur](http://localhost:7512/_/greeting/say-hello?name=Yagmur)
:::

### WebSocket

To execute an action through the WebSocket protocol [wscat](https://www.npmjs.com/package/wscat) can be used:

```bash
$ npx wscat -c ws://localhost:7512 --execute '{
  "controller": "greeting",
  "action": "sayHello",
  "name": "Yagmur"
}'
```

### Kourou

> From a terminal [Kourou](/core/2/some-link), the Kuzzle CLI, can be used to execute an action:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From a terminal, [Kourou](/core/2/some-link), the Kuzzle CLI, can be used to execute an action:
```

```bash
$ kourou greeting:sayHello --arg name=Yagmur
```

It is possible to pass multiple arguments by repeating the `--arg <arg>=<value>` flag or specify a body with the `--body '{}'` flag.  

::: info
More info about [Kourou](/core/2/some-link).
:::

### SDK

> From one of the [SDKs](/sdk), it is possible to use the `query` method which takes as parameter a [Request Payload](/core/2/some-link).  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From one of our [SDKs](/sdk), it is possible to use the `query` method which takes a [Request Payload](/core/2/some-link) as a parameter.
```

:::: tabs
::: Javascript

Using the Javascript SDK [Kuzzle.query](/sdk/js/7/core-classes/kuzzle/query) method:

```js
const response = await kuzzle.query({
  controller: 'greeting',
  action: 'sayHello',
  name: 'Yagmur'
})
```

:::
::: Dart

Using the Dart SDK [Kuzzle.query](/sdk/dart/2/core-classes/kuzzle/query) method:

```dart
final response = await kuzzle.query({
  'controller': 'greeting',
  'action': 'sayHello',
  'name': 'Yagmur'
});
```

:::
::::

## Allow access to a custom Controller Action

> In the rights management system, role are managing access to API actions.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the rights management system, roles are managing access to API actions.  
```

> They operate on a whitelist principle by listing the controllers and actions they have access to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They operate on a whitelist principle by listing the controllers and actions they give access to.
```

So, to allow access to the `greeting:sayHello` action, the following role can be written:

```bash
$ kourou security:createRole '{
  controllers: {
    greeting: {
      actions: {
        sayHello: true
      }
    }
  }
}' --id steward
```

> It is also possible to use a wildcard (`*`) to give access to all the actions of a controller:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is also possible to use a wildcard (`*`) to give access to all of a controller's actions:
```

# API Controllers

Kuzzle allows to extend its existing API using Controllers. Controllers are **logical containers of actions**.  

These actions are then **processed like any other API action** and can be executed through the different mechanisms to secure and normalize requests.

## Add a new Controller

> Each controller can therefore have several actions. Each of these **actions is associated with a function** called [handler](/core/2/guides/develop-on-kuzzle/2-api-controllers#action-handler).

Reviewer 3: Wrong anchor ref:
```suggestion
Each controller can therefore have several actions. Each of these **actions is associated with a function** called [handler](/core/2/guides/develop-on-kuzzle/2-api-controllers#handler-function).
```
